[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>So happy to see you.
>>Ah, you look wonderful.
Oh, I bet you do.
I do too.
I miss you too.
Hey, how are you?
>>Good.
How are you?
>>OK.
OK.
Yeah.
No shit.
Good.
Hello.
>>[INAUDIBLE]
Sunflowers.
I wish I could bring you
much more than flowers.
And here's a nice little card.
And I try to apply
everything you do.
>>Good.
That's the best present.
>>There's [INAUDIBLE].
I love you.
[KISSING]
>>Hello.
Hello.
Oh, boy.
You're beautiful.
Hello.
>>Hi.
I love seeing you.
I'll see you.
I'm going to come to
the movie tomorrow.
>>Oh, yeah.
Good.
No, she gets it--
>>And one man, the man who was
there before everyone else,
lead us on our quest-- Ram Dass.
[CHEERS AND APPLAUSE]
He changed the way we
thought about life.
Now we find we
again need Ram Dass.
As we enter the
latter stages of life,
the big questions of
peace and of purpose
have returned, this
time demanding answers.
And our old friend,
Ram Dass, has also
returned to offer
us a helping hand.
He again blazes a
new trail, inviting
us to join him on the
next stage of the journey.
This part has been
particularly difficult for him
as he was stopped
in his tracks by
a massive cerebral
hemorrhage that he was not
expected to survive.
But survive he did with this
humor intact and a bigger heart
than ever.
Let's welcome with love
and aloha, Ram Dass.
[CHEERS AND APPLAUSE]
[LAUGHING]
>>That's my message.
[LAUGHTER]
[CHEERS AND APPLAUSE]
[EXHALE]
The stroke was traumatic.
And traumatic to my body
and to my spiritual life.
I think before that
I used to think
that all there was
was getting to God
was meditation or
singing or et cetera.
And after the stroke,
I added one more thing.
Trauma.
And from an ego point of view
the stroke was devastating.
And so in response
to the stroke I
chose to identify not
with my ego, not my ego,
and I chose to change my
identification to my soul.
It was clear to me that the
soul didn't have a stroke, just
like the soul does not die.
And the ego dies.
So when I identify
with the soul,
I found out the soul
merely witnesses the drama,
not lives it.
And I found it much
more comfortable
to witness the stroke
rather than suffer with it.
Now what I have
developed is a model
of my own inner structure.
That there are three
eyes in myself.
There is eye one, eye
two, and eye three.
They're not these
eyes, by the way.
These are other eyes.
The one I had used
most often is one.
One.
The one is the ego.
I want.
I see.
I hear.
I. The ego, as far
as I'm concerned,
is like software for
the hard drive that runs
this melodrama on this plane.
And the second eye
is the eye of soul.
And I'd rather
stick to number two.
It has less stuff.
The soul has
individual difference.
It is my spiritual identity.
And number three is-- well,
it's the only mystical part.
It's the Atman.
It's the small voice of
God within each of us.
It's the park of the one.
Through number three we are
able to contact the rest of it
subjectively.
Not objectively.
Three.
I went to a hospital to
see a friend of mine.
And he said, Richard, I'm God.
And I said to him.
Well, I am, too.
He didn't expect that because
three is common to all of us.
A spark of God.
A spark of awareness.
One, two, and three are
planes of consciousness.
I exist on all three
of those planes.
You must also.
Can you see this
diagram back there?
It's a picture of you.
One is your ego and all that
it goes with-- body, et cetera.
Two is soul.
And three is three.
Saves argument.
[LIGHT LAUGHTER]
I used mushrooms, my
psychedelic mushrooms.
They were grace for us.
The psychedelic
mushrooms and the LSD
showed me three inside
myself and showed me
that three was connected to God.
The mushrooms.
I was in Tim's living room.
And I was alone in there.
And I suddenly
realized there was
somebody in the room with me.
And I looked at the shadows.
Somebody there.
And it was me.
It was me by all the
ways to know myself.
All my roles.
One, two, three, four.
My role as a professor.
My role as a pilot.
My role as my parent's child.
And then I said, well, I'm
getting rid of all my roles.
And it's sort of like amnesia.
That's what this drug
is going to do to me.
This wicked Tim Leary.
[LIGHT LAUGHTER]
See, I was a good guy.
He was the bad guy.
[LAUGHTER]
And then I looked down.
I said, well, at
least I have my body.
And I looked down with my eyes
open and looked at the couch.
And there was no body on it.
[LAUGHTER]
And I realized that I was on
another plane of consciousness
than the one my body was on.
After that mushroom session,
after that I couldn't-- Tim
and Ralph and me and the group
was working with the "Tibetan
Book of the Dead."
And here in this book used to
initiate monks for their death,
I was reading descriptions of
my psychedelic experiences.
And I thought those easterners--
I was a psychologist here
in the West.
But nothing I did in
my psychological work
in research or teaching
gave me the feeling
or opened the feeling that I was
getting that mushroom session.
I was getting a
feeling of at homeness.
At homeness.
I was at home in the universe.
I was not worried.
I was just-- So
I read this book,
"The Tibetan Book of the
Dead," and "The Bhagavad Gita,"
and so on.
And I said, these
easterners know something
about what I'm going through.
They've written maps
of consciousness.
And my friends were
going to India.
Allen Ginsberg, Tim, Ralph.
So I figured I'm going to India.
Planes of consciousness.
If you look at India from
this plane of consciousness,
so many people.
When I came into India, I
came in a friend's Land Rover.
And I was appalled at how much
the population was putting up
with.
But three months
later, I had seen
something I had realized
that they were living
on a different plane
than I was having landed
in the plane from New York.
The place where
Hindus go to die.
The city.
And they burned at the
side of the Ganges River.
And I was appalled
to see the scene.
There were people with cancer,
and there were people with--
>>Leprosy.
>>What?
Leprosy.
>>Leprosy.
Yeah.
Leprosy.
They were walking around.
They were each
wearing a little pouch
on the side on
their lungi, a pouch
containing money, which they
were buying their funeral pyre.
And then I went and
stayed in a temple.
Many temples.
And I got a sense that
I had shifted planes.
And then I came
back to the city--
the dying city-- and the
people on the streets,
they were looking
at me with pity.
These people on the streets.
Their legs were like this.
They were looking
at me with pity
because I was like
a hungry ghost.
They knew they were in the
right place at the right time
from their spiritual trip.
And they were
looking at me, even
though I had traveler's
checks and everything,
they were looking
at me with pity.
And I could see it the next time
after I'd been in those temples
because I wasn't so frozen
in material reality.
This is for this audience.
I was at John Lilly's house and
Richard Feynman, the physicist,
came by.
And I was telling him about my
guru because I was a rascal.
And so one story
I told, Maharaji
had appeared in
two places at once.
And Richard really
couldn't accept that.
[LIGHT LAUGHTER]
He said the foundation
of my science
is that a thing can not
appear in two places.
I said, well, you
got a problem--
[LAUGHTER]
--because Maharaji did.
Maharaji, he gave me-- he gave
me freedom from my method.
Method of psychedelics.
There's two methods.
One method-- guru.
Method-- mushrooms.
So in the first
time I went there,
after he started to get
to know me, he said,
do you have those
vitamins for the mind?
[LAUGHTER]
I guess he had my reputation.
So I had three pills
300 micrograms each--
[EXCLAMATIONS]
--which each one is
a good sizable dose.
And he took them off my
hand-- three of them.
I mean, I'm saying to myself,
this guy knows everything,
so I don't have to caution
him about the drugs.
[LAUGHTER]
So he put the drugs like that.
When I got home
in America, I kept
wondering-- first of all,
nothing happened to him at all.
[LAUGHTER]
I mean, three.
And I watched.
I was a scientist.
Watched.
I was watching.
Well, when I got home
to the United States,
I wondered, look, I was
watching from there,
and he was throwing the
pills inside his mouth.
But he was throwing
it over the shoulder.
That's what he must
have been doing.
Aha, that's a scientist at work.
[LAUGHTER]
So I went back to
India in two years.
Two years.
And he said to me, you gave
some medicine last time.
Yeah.
He said, did I take it?
[LAUGHTER]
See he already-- I
said, I think so.
[LAUGHTER]
And then I had four pills.
I had four pills, and I
watched him this time.
No throwing.
He comes like--
[LAUGHTER]
So he pulled his
blanket over his head
and came up with the
craziest look I've ever seen.
He was trying to scare me.
[LAUGHTER]
And then he said these were used
in the Kulu Valley years ago.
The yogis prepared their bodies
and their minds to take them.
India proved that there
were people-- hundreds
and hundreds-- who knew about
this long before we did.
India they live
in two and three.
We live in one.
One with a little bit of two.
My method, my sadhana
is guru kripa,
means the grace of the guru.
The Guru and the chela
meet heart to heart.
And the Guru's heart
mirrors number two
and three in the chela.
My Guru, he never
talked to me one.
Around him gave me the
confidence and the faith
that mushrooms gave me.
I'll tell you the secret that
souls cannot be seen by egos.
Souls can be only seen by souls.
One of my colleagues
was going to India.
And he said he'd take
a look at my Guru.
And he said he's fat and
he's rough and he's--
That colleague was
only seeing himself
because he had a model
in his mind of Indians,
Indian holy men, et cetera.
[DISTANT CHURCH BELLS]
Yeah.
[LIGHT LAUGHTER]
[LAUGHTER]
[BELLS CONTINUE CHIMING]
When I came to the stroke
situation in the hospital,
most of the people
around me were
expecting that I would die.
First of all, I turned
in to the watcher,
the watcher of the melodrama
instead of the experiencer
of the melodrama.
I was experiencing watching.
And I decided that when we can
be conscious at two levels,
then we've beat the game.
At least the two levels gets
a perspective on each one.
Like my soul has a perspective
that is different than my ego.
And those perspectives
give us freedom
to enjoy getting free of roles.
I'll tell you an
interesting one.
I used to come and
sit by dying people
because I thought it was
really good training for me.
Like the Buddhist monks
sit in the charnel grounds
to see what happened
to their bodies.
But I'd go into the room
the dying person was in
and I'd go in being
my role, oh, let's
see, a concerned person
visiting the moribund.
That was my role.
And because I was in my
role, the person in the room
was in their role, too.
But the minute I stopped doing
that, when I was outside a room
and identified with my soul
and came into that room,
then who was lying in
the bed was a soul that
was having a tough incarnation.
And my mind was mirroring
their spiritual identity.
And so I came into the room
bringing more than fellowship
or a plumping of the pillow.
I was bringing them a mirror
to see their own soul.
I can see you as souls.
We've been doing this
meeting for years and years.
We've been with a
fire in the middle.
We've been trying
to figure out what
we are doing here as souls.
This fucked up thing.
[LAUGHTER]
I identified Richard.
My mother and father
called me Richard.
Come here, Richard.
And all the qualities of
Richard and my body, that
was me in their minds.
They didn't see
their son as a soul
because they didn't see
themselves as souls.
In Hinduism, they say you
have a good incarnation when
your parents are yogis.
[LIGHT LAUGHTER]
How many of you, that?
How many?
[CHUCKLES]
Right before I was stroked
I was graced-- graced
by my Guru and his higher ups.
[LIGHT LAUGHTER]
Hanuman, and Ram, and Sita.
And then I got this stroke.
And I've been saying this.
His grace on one
hand and this stroke.
Grace stroke.
I had grace before.
I was always graced.
[POLICE SIREN]
[LAUGHTER]
That's energy, you know?
You can fool it up your spine.
[LIGHT LAUGHTER]
I couldn't imagine
getting stroked when
my Guru was looking after me.
He was looking the other way.
I was checking out
in the hospital.
Because all the consciousness
is around me were--
[CLICKING TONGUE]
--too bad, too bad the stroke.
Too bad.
And I began to feel
it was too bad.
And then it started to creep in
that the stroke was introducing
me to silence.
At the time I couldn't talk.
Then I began to realize this
was another incarnation.
Because in the last
incarnation, Paul Gorman and I
wrote a book called
"How Can I Help?"
But now I write a book,
"How Can You Help Me?"
[LAUGHTER]
Because the "How Can I Help?"
is a power play in the society.
And "How Can You Help Me?"
is dependency, lack of power.
And I saw these
roles, and these roles
I never expected to play
in this incarnation.
The stroke pushed
me over the edge.
How far over the edge
remains-- The doctors
had a case conference
with me as the case.
And they were very, very nice.
They invited me to come in.
[LIGHT LAUGHTER]
And I said are you
equating me with my brain?
I said, you know,
I am not a thing.
I'm not a material thing.
And they all sat round to--
[CHUCKLES]
--I love those things.
They looked at each other.
It's too bad this
man got a stroke.
[LAUGHTER]
Oh, dear.
One nurse I got to come clean.
She didn't feel she
was a thing either.
[LAUGHTER]
I was reading
Romana Maharshi, who
is one of the outstanding
saints in the 20th century.
And he was quoting Shankara.
And this quote really
covers number three.
Number three.
You also are.
The Johnny, a sage,
self-realized being,
who through experience has
realized his Self-- capital S,
Self-- and the Atman
to be the Brahman
means the spark in you--
number three-- is one with God.
Brahman.
As truth, as knowledge,
as endless bliss,
the single essence eternality.
Boy, when you're
rushing these streets,
think of I that is eternal.
Your three is eternal.
It's part of God.
For him who aspires
after liberation, moksha,
there is no other way
of release from bondage
but knowledge of the identity
of Brahman and the self,
meaning number three in
you and us will become
it is identical with God.
But you don't talk
when you're like three.
Maharaji was three.
He was identity with three.
I'm climbing up to one to two.
One you've got to clean it
up so it doesn't draw you.
Clean up of its attachments.
See number two has
only one motivation.
It wants only to merge
with the beloved.
With the One.
That's in you.
You are a soul having one
motivation to that ecstatic
merging with it all.
I've been studying Dzogchen,
Tibetan Buddhist meditation.
In that meditation you
identify with your awareness.
You don't identify with
what it's aware of.
I am aware of this body.
I am not identifying
with this body.
I am identifying with awareness.
If you identify with
awareness-- by the way,
you cannot study awareness
because awareness is not
a thing.
You can only be awareness.
You cannot see awareness.
If you have your
awareness and I have mine,
we are together in awareness.
That's three.
We are aware in
many different ways.
I was in the planes of
India with this fellow
who is going to his Guru.
I had to go to the bathroom.
And I went to the outhouse, and
it was a star-studded night.
And because the
stars were so near,
I thought about my mother who
had died six months before.
And then I got back into bed.
And I was a passenger
in this car.
This fellow wanted
to find his Guru.
We rode 170 miles.
And the fellow says,
this is the temple.
And I was recalcitrant.
This fellow I was
with, his Guru,
he's bowing on his stomach.
Dunda Pranam.
And I'm standing by thinking,
I'm not going to do that.
I mean, I'm just a Westerner.
We don't go around
touching people's feet.
[CHUCKLES]
And so then he gave us
some talk-- a little talk.
Then he sent us some food.
And then he said to the fellow,
have you got a picture of me?
Fellow has a picture of him.
He said, give him the picture.
Me.
I think, well he wants to
have me have a picture of him.
We came up in this big car.
Land Rover, which belonged
to my friend, David.
And this fellow who was touching
the guru's feet-- the guru
said, you came in a big car.
I said, yes.
This fellow that's lying
down, he said, Maharaji,
you can have it.
I mean, it's not his.
It's David's car.
I mean, jeez.
[LAUGHING]
So I sputtered, you
can't give him that car.
And everybody's laughing at me.
So the guru says, would you
buy one for me like that?
I said, well, I've
got money at home.
But I don't think I'd buy.
[LAUGHING]
I'm coming from a family
of Jewish fundraisers,
and I'd never seen
one like this one.
[LAUGHING]
And said, come here.
Sit down.
He said, you were under
the stars last night.
I said, yeah.
Everybody is under the stars.
That's not a miracle.
He says, you were thinking
about your mother.
Now here I'm a passenger in
a car going up the mountains.
How does he know
about that thought?
That is stretching my
psychological know how.
And he left that
conundrum as something
for my intellect to gnaw upon.
As soon as he got
the intellect out,
he looked at me with
love-- complete love.
And my mind is saying now
he knows that thought.
My god, he knows what
I do in the bathroom.
[LAUGHTER]
Oh.
Oh, Jesus.
Oh, oh, ee, ee, ah.
Eh.
And then he knows me.
And how can he be so loving?
And the love that I
had never received--
and my parents are loving--
this kind of love it opened me.
Opened me through love.
Through the miracle
for the mind.
Since I've had the stroke, I've
seen the stroke as his grace.
And he is with me
about 50% of the time.
He left his body in 1973,
but he still is with me.
The 'with me' is a quality of
presence in my environment.
Presence out there
and presence in there.
People say to me, you seem so
happy, and you've got a stroke.
I'm happy because Maharaji
is with me on another plane.
It's like having an
imaginary playmate--
[LIGHT LAUGHTER]
--except what I can say is
the presence of Maharaji,
which is in this room, is
the same presence when I
was with Maharaji in his body.
Maybe it's just my mind.
Maharaji, you are my mind.
He laughs.
Sure.
It's my mind.
And sure, it's a presence.
When I go towards
Maharaji, all the wrapping
of the man who I met in
India, the wrapping is gone.
There's a soul friend.
You can look at your spouses,
at your mothers and fathers,
at your children, at your
significant other as souls,
when you have already
considered yourself a soul.
A soul merely means you are
living on a different plane.
That's what happened in India.
There was a whole culture
living on another plane.
Our culture doesn't
see that other plane.
You have one, two, and three.
When you say I, figure
out which is which.
I, god?
I, ego?
I, soul.
If you're going to identify
with something or somebody,
it's two.
You can make it two.
I was on a 3rd Avenue bus.
I was sitting down,
and a woman entered.
She had been probably
cleaning an office.
She had a paper under her arm.
And she and I looked
at each other.
Souls making contact.
We have a melodrama now,
soul partners or something.
I think what we are
are soul friends.
Soul friends.
That could be the new
thing to gather us.
Soul friends.
I'm a soul not having a stroke.
Not dying.
One of the things I've been
writing about is aging.
The age stage, like
adolescence, is a stage.
And age is stage.
Age stage really is a when
you're a culture where--
[POLICE SIREN]
[LIGHT LAUGHTER]
Oh, so good.
[LAUGHTER]
So good.
Ah.
Oh.
[LAUGHTER]
In the age stage, I
can't help but feeling
that you go from ego to soul.
Remember this-- we all
are these three things.
And then we go from
a perspective of ego,
then to a perspective of soul.
So we were talking about
the memory this morning.
And, you know, it's funny.
When people's memory goes,
memory is good for the ego.
The ego loves memory.
And the soul doesn't
really give a damn.
[LIGHT LAUGHTER]
I mean, what good is memory.
Memory keeps you from here.
You join with the
beloved in the moment.
It's be here now.
It's right here.
There's a Buddhist saying,
"Prolong not the past.
Invite not the future.
Alter not your
innate wakefulness.
Don't fear appearances.
There is nothing more to do."
Maharaji is empty.
He is the door frame to
seeing in to the emptiness.
We went in the '60s-- the
LSD and mushrooms and pot
and so on was given to us.
Tim and I were soul friends.
But my Guru is three.
And I don't know anybody
in the West as a three.
[CLICKS TONGUE]
It's too bad for this
culture because those mirrors
are hard to get.
So all I can do is
see you as souls.
And what have you been doing?
Taking seriously
your incarnation.
See we all are three, two, one.
All it demands that we
are, identifying with two.
Two has a motive of
blending with number three.
That's you.
That's your motive.
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]